Data:-Raw & isolated facts abotan entitiy (recordable) e.g. image,video,map etc
Information:-Processed, use-able & meaningfull data.
Database:-Collection of similiar data/info.
DBMS:-S/w used to create,read ,update & delete data/information.

	Disadvatage of File System:-
1.)Data redundancy:-It is possible that the same information may be duplicated in different files.this leads to data redundancy results in memory wastage
2.)Data inconsistency
3.)Diffficulty in  accessing data
4.)Data isolation
5.)Security problem:-Database should be accessible to users in limited way.
Each user should be allowed to access data concerning his requirements only.
6.)Atomicity problem:-this means, it must happen in its entirely or not at all.
7.)Concurrent-access Anamolies:-Multiple users are allowed to access data simultaneously.this is for the sake of better performance and faster response.
8.)Integrity problem:-Data integrity means that the data contained in the database in both correct and consistent.for this purpose the data stored in database must satisfy correct and constraints.
					LECTURE:-1.3
				OLTP VS OLAP
OLAP:-
i.)Consists of historical data from various Databases.
ii.)It is subject oriented. Used for Data Mining, Analytics, Decision making,etc.
iii.)The data is used in planning, problem solving and decision making.
iv.)Large amount of data is stored typically in TB, PB
v.)Relatively slow as the amount of data involved is large. Queries may take hours.
vi.)This data is generally managed by CEO, MD, GM.
vii.)Only read and rarely write operation.
viii.)It only need backup from time to time as compared to OLTP.
e.g.)Netflix movie recommendation system.
OLTP
i.)Consists only operational current data.
ii.)It is application oriented. Used for business tasks.
iii.)The data is used to perform day to day fundamental operations.
iv.)The size of the data is relatively small as the historical data is archived. For ex MB, GB
v.)Very Fast as the queries operate on 5% of the data.
vi.)This data is managed by clerks, managers.
vii.)Both read and write operations.
viii.)Backup and recovery process is maintained religiously
e.g.)ATM center is an OLTP application.

				LECTURE:-4(1.3) 
				ER model
Introduced by Dr Peter chen in 1976.
It is non-technical designing method work on conceptual level based on perception of real world.
Consist of collection of basic objects called Entities & of relationship among these objects & attribute which define thier properties.
Provide a logical and standard way to visualise data organising.
Diagramatic representaion of organising data.
Can be understood by non-technical user.
					LECTURE:-5(2.2)
					Entites & Entity Set
It is an object in the real world that is distingushable from other object based on value of attributes it possess.
Types of entities:-
a.)Tangible:-Entities which physically exist in the real-world e.g. Car,Bus
b.)Intangible:-Entities which does not exist physically in the real world e.g. Acoount.
Entity Set:-Collection of similiar type of enties i.e. that shares same type of properties or attributes called Entity Set.
ER Diagram
Entity can be represented by a row/tuple/record in a relational model. 
e.g. Individual Student
Entity Set is represented by a Table in relational model.
An entity can not be represented in an ER Diagram bcoz it is an (actual) instance.
Entity Set is represnted by a rectangle in ER diagram
					LECTURE:-5(2.3)
					Types of attribute
Attributes are the units that describe the characteristics of an entity.
For each attribute there is a set of permitted values called domain.
In ER diagram attribute is represented by an oval or ecclipse & in relational table by a separate column.
			LECTURE:-6
Types
a.1) Simple a.2) Composite 
b.1)SingleValued b.2)MultiValued 
c.1)Stored c.2)Derived 
a.1.)Simple:-Attribute which cannot be further represented by simple oval.e.g.DOB
a.2.)Composite:-Attribute cannot be further represented by simple oval.
->Oval connected to oval
.e.g.Name to f_name & l_name & m_name
b.1.)Single-Valued:-Single can have only one value at an instance of time.
b.2.)MultiValued:-Can have more than one value at an instance of time.
->Oval is overlapped in another oval.
e.g. Comment on a post.
In representation table it is kept in different table.
c.1.)Stored :-Now the value is stored.
c.2.)Derived:- Value can be computed in runtime using stored attributes.
e.g. Address can be composite and multi-valued.
				LECTURE:-7(2.5)
Relationship:-Association bw two or more entities of same or different entitiy set.
No representaion of relationship in ER diagram as entity can not represented too.
In representational model represented by using either table or row.
Relationship Type/Set:-A set of similiar type of relationship.
In ER diagram represnted by Diamond.
In relational table either by a separate table or by separate column (foreign keys.)
Every RT have three components:-
i.) Name:-Teacher teach students
ii.) Degree:-Binary /Ternary
iii.) Cardinality Ration / Participation Ratio :-e.g. OneToMany, ManyToMany
				LECTURE:-8(2.5)
DEGREE OF A RELATIONSHIP:- No of entity set participated in a relation set.
Mostly relationship are binary ,occasionaly they may differ.
Can be unary(LOOP), binary, ternary, quartenry.		
				LECTURE:-9(2.6)
				Degree
Express the no. of entities to which other entity can be related via a relationship.
One To One :-When entity of one entity set can be related to atmost one entity of another entity set.
e.g. Citizen to adhar
One To Many e.g. Citizen To Mobile No.
Many To One e.g. Mobile no. to Citizen
Many To Many e.g. Citizen to Residential State 
Teacher To Students
 
					LECTURE:-10(2.7)
Participation Constraints:-Specifies whether the existence of one entitiy is depends on its being related to another entity via a relationship type.
These constraints specify the minimum & maximum no. of relationship instances that each entity can/must participate in to exist.
Max Cardinality / Min Cardinality:-It defines the maximum/minimum no. of times on entity occurance participating in a relationship.
Total Participation:-An entity set is TP if its entity is related to other entity.
Min Cardiinality is == or >1.
Partial Participation:- When if atleast one entity of any entity set is not related to another entity set.
Min Cardiinality can be  == 0
					LECTURE:-(3.1)
					LECTURE:-14(3.4)
Armstrong Axiom/Armstrong Closure /Closure on Attribute set/Closure of attribute set:-
Attribute closure of an attribute set A can be defined as a set of attributes which can be functionally determined from it.
Denoted by F+
					LECTURE:-15(3.5)
					Closure set of attributes


				LECTURE:-16(3.)				



LECTURE:-17(3.7)




				LECTURE:-18(3.8)
				Irreducible Set of F.D.( Canonical Form)
In some cases it might be a possible case that the entire rule is not redundent but attribute in that is rule might be redundant.

				LECTURE:-20 
Keys:-The  entity(attribute) or set of entities(attributes) which can be used to identify an individual row  or rest of attribute(entities) respectively in a Table.

  				LECTURE:-21
Super Key superset of  Candidate Key superset of  Primary Key.
				Candidate Key 
INFORMALLY:-Efficient or minimal key of super key is Candidate Key.
The super key of which proper subset is not a super key.

				LECTURE:-22

  				LECTURE:-23
No. of candidate key:-

  				LECTURE:-24
Redundancy:-When some data got stored mulltiple times in DBMS un-necessarily.
Disadvantage of Redundancy:-
i.)Insertion , Deletion & Modification anomalies.
ii.) Inconsistency.
iii.) Increase in db size & increase in processng time.
Insertion Anomalies:-When certain data can not be inserted into db without the presence of other data.
Deletion Anomalies:-When deletion of one data ,cause deletion of some other data.
Modification Anomalies:-On updating one data all other data must be updated.
  				LECTURE:-25
Normalisation:-Decomposition of tables is based on functional dependency.
Like one para should contain one philosphy like that one table shuld represent single agenda.
Process to remove redundancy.
  				LECTURE:-26 ( 1NF)
Every cell must have only one value(Atomicity) value may be null.
Most of the time will  in 1NF already.
On converting ER to Relational Model ,for every multi-valued column u have to create a new/differnt table.
Interview Question:- Consider a relational schema , then it is defacto implied that table is in 1NF.
Every column must contain value of that domain.


  				LECTURE:-27 (2 nf)
Primary Attribute :- The attribute which are parts of Candidate Key.
Non-Primary Attribute :- The attribute which are not parts of Candidate Key.
The are also depenedent attribute.
Partial Dependency:-If any non-primary attribute is not entirely dependent on whole Primary Attribute rather depend on one or partial attributes or proper subset  of Primary Attribute.
Compelete 

Rule For  2nf:- i.) Must be in 1nf  ii.) Free of Partial Dependency
Why should be free of Partial Dependency:-
 Bcoz Primary key can never been empty or null, it does not mean that if Primary key cosists of multiple attributes then every attributes must not be null. Entirely Primary Key must not be null.
In some case if when Primary Key consist of multiple attribute key and it is not empty/null then it might happen that one of the attribute of that Primary Key can be null on which one of Non-Primary Attribute  could be Partial Dependent, so it will create Data Inconsisteny.

plus LECTURE-28 

  				LECTURE:-29
  				LECTURE:-30  Rules for 3-nf
Transitive dependency:- When non-prime attributes start finding another non-prime attribute.
					or
When non-prime(/prime) attributes start finding non-prime attributes.
A F.D. is from alpha to beta( a->b) called Transitive Dependency if a,b belongs to non-prime attribute. 
Rules for 3-nf:- i.) It must be 2-nf.  ii.) No transitive dependency
Short Cut:-
every FB from alpha to beta( a -> b)
i.) either a is a super key  or ii.)b is a prime attribute.
					LECTURE:-32 BCNF
In alpha to beta a -> b, (a) must be super key or candidate key.
Problem:-When non-prime/prime start identifying prime attributes.

					LECTURE:-33 
LECTURE :- 36
When size of relation is two attributes by nature it is in BCNF,
2.) If in any relation the size of candidate key is one it is in 2NF.
				LECTURE:-37 LOOSELESS
Looseless join decomposition/non-additive decomposition:-This property guarantee that the extra or loss of row generation problem does not exist after decomposition.
It is a mandatory property must always hold good.
If a relation R is decomposed into two relations R1,R2 ,then it will be lossless iff
i.) attr(R1) union attr(R2)=attr(R)
ii.)attr(R1) intersection attr(R2) !==null
iii.) attr(R1) bisect attr(R2)==attr(R1)  or attr(R1) bisect attr(R2) =attr(R2)
				LECTURE:-38( Example)
				LECTURE:-39 Dependecy Preserving
If a table R having F.D. set F ,is decomposed into two table R1 & R2 having F.D. set F1 & F2 respectively,then
	F1 is subset of F,F2 is subset of F,F1 union F2 equal to F.
It is not mandatory to be Losesless Decomposition.  
	






















